---
layout: post
title: Web Survey Bug Bash
page-name: Blog Post - Strategic Data
day: 27
month: Jan
year: 2016
tags: culture agile
gallery: bugbash
description: Creating an Agile and fun way to test a new version of WebSurvey
---
# Background
I came back from maternity leave mid 2015 with a new outlook on how we had been doing front end. From the legacy code collecting dust, the raw CSS files conflicting over each other and the painfully overdone copy and pasting of old code that no longer works it needed a total rework. Instead of just bug-fixing random HTML and CSS as they came up and adding in new CSS and JS files on top of old ones it needed some care and deliberation.

My first plan was to upgrade the CSS styling to use SASS. By having a consistent SASS structure <link to blog where I stole this> when you needed to update a certain component the code would be in an easily findable location. As well as when a new theme can in from a client it makes the process of updating the styling straight forward. I improved the styling for our components as well, creating many issues and prototypes on Github until we all agreed on how they should look and feel.
I also separated out the vendor scss from the custom scss and restricted which components of the vendor files we were using to make conflicts less likely but with the option to add them back in later.

However I soon discovered that by adding this sort of thing in we would need to develop an asset pipeline to handle the conversion from SASS to CSS. After having a look at what some of our other projects used I decided to give gulp<link> a try and found it was really nice to use. It converted the files over as well as minifying them and I was soon applying the same principles to our javascript files. By adding in this pipeline I reduced the load time of the page from 700ms to 250ms!

Then came the legacy code. I sifted through it, trying to figure out which template files we needed and which we didn't. The ones I wasn't sure about going up on GitHub to determine a consensus. I managed to delete a wide range of files from this new version that we hadn't used in many years. As well as update the ones we were using to include valid HTML5 and follow accessibility guidelines and writing up a score of new documentation on how to use off this now.

Finally it was time to rigorously test this new version. A daunting task filled with nerves and doubt that my new version would be able to withstand the screening process and be let loose on real projects.
So I found a way to make it fun.

# Bug Bash!
Our first bug bash was held January 2016. The idea being to gather the testers together and test the new version in one big go, in a structured yet relaxed setting. Here's how it all happened:

## 1. Getting ready!
Channeling my inner educator I imagined all the resources we would need on the day and what could possibly go wrong.
First technology, always a tricky one wrought with potential problems. I set up two websites that we would test and bookmarked them on a variety of smart phones and tablets, after I resolved the wifi issues that came up during this.

Next I set up how people would document the issues that arose. I assessed the space we would be using, a small table in the middle of a space with the three desks of the testers around it and thought a collaborative, non-technical approach would be good here. I raided the supplies closet and found a range of paper, pens, textas and colourful post it notes. As there was no white board I drew up which sites and what aspects we would be testing on the paper with a key of what the post-it notes meant:
 - Purple -> styling issues
 - Yellow -> usability warnings
 - Red -> major errors

Then divided the sheets per website and what sort of issues I was expecting on PC, tablet, phone and all 3.
Finally I baked bug themed cup cakes and found a small bug themed prize for the winner of the bash. The winner being the person who finds the best bug.

## 2. Bug Bash
I started with an introduction of what the new version was about and where/how it needed to be tested. For example on a variety of browsers, devices and ways. Next was on how to record a bug, being on a post it with as much detail as possible in the appropriate colour and on the corresponding sheet.
The atmosphere was really good, everyone seemed eager to test the new version and the post-its started flying. Mostly my role during this phase was to answer questions and look at bugs on the monitors as they arose. While I thought it would be a little disheartening watch a group of people pick apart my work, people were very positive and found many little issues it would have taken me months, if ever, to discover on my own.
We soon ran out of cup cakes and purple notes as styling bugs were found on different browsers. Thankfully not many errors came up and I was left with many colourful sheets of paper with fantastic notes on how to improve the version. Though Gigi won the best bug prize with her finding that on mobile input number fields will silently delete your entry if it's text and move on to the next page without warning.
As well as an increase in confidence that people would be more comfortable using it now they had given it a good go in a relaxed way. I also hoped to instil a sense of ownership of the product so it will used more in the future.

## 3. Write Up
I felt this result translated best to a Trello board<link>. This also meant that other people from the team could access it and see the result in their hard work and I could track my progress. The small wins I could track and fix quickly while the rest I linked to corresponding Github issues. Some were re-designs of existing components and some were creating new ones all together where we had found a gap.
